# Exceptions

## Overview

Hipparchus defines a set of exceptions in order to convey the
precise low-level cause of failure.

## Unchecked Exceptions

Starting from version 3.0, all exceptions generated by the
Hipparchus code are <em>unchecked</em> (i.e. they inherit from
the standard `RuntimeException` class).
The main rationale supporting this design decision is that the
exceptions generated in the library are not recoverable: They most
of the time result from bad input parameters or some failure due to
numerical problems.
A thorough discussion of the pros and cons of checked and unchecked
exceptions can be read in
[this post](http://www.mindview.net/Etc/Discussions/CheckedExceptions)
by Bruce Eckel.

## Hierarchies

The exceptions defined by Hipparchus follow the Java standard hierarchies:

* [IllegalArgumentException](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/lang/IllegalArgumentException.html): A [MathIllegalArgumentException](../apidocs/org/hipparchus/exception/MathIllegalArgumentException.html) is thrown when some input parameter fails a precondition check.
* [IllegalStateException](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/lang/IllegalStateException.html): A [MathIllegalStateException](../apidocs/org/hipparchus/exception/MathIllegalStateException.html) is thrown when some inconsistency has been detected.
* [ArithmeticException](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/lang/MathArithmeticException.html): A [MathArithmeticException](../apidocs/org/hipparchus/exception/MathArithmeticException.html) is thrown when conditions such as "division by zero" or "overflow" are encountered.
* [UnsupportedOperationException](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/lang/MathUnsupportedOperationException.html): A [ `MathUnsupportedOperationException`](../apidocs/org/hipparchus/exception/MathUnsupportedOperationException.html) indicates that a feature is missing or does not make sense in the given context.

In all of the above exception hierarchies, several subclasses can exist,
each conveying a specific underlying cause of the problem.

## Features

* Localization - The detailed error messages (i.e. the string returned by the getLocalizedMessage method) can be localized. However, besides the American/English default, French is the only language for which a translation resource is available.

* Exception "context" - Every exception generated by Hipparchus implements the ExceptionContextProvider interface. A call to the getContext method will return the ExceptionContext instance stored in the exception, which the user can further customize by adding messages and/or any object.
